so uh there's a QR code link here if you
would like to download the audio files
that we're going to be using uh in this
demonstration of using geometry nodes
and simulation nodes for audio reactive
music videos um I'll leave that up for
for just a second um hopefully the link
will work um a little bit about myself
uh my name is Mike hitz I'm the head of
CG for a company called templates.com uh
we provide um
360 videos there we go making sure it
works uh we provide 360 panoramas uh
that are totally seamless and looping uh
that are CG driving plates for the
virtual production industry specifically
for car processing uh all of these are
done in blender and rendered in octane
um I appreciate it's not the subject of
this talk at all uh but it would be
remiss of me not to plug our own work um
if anybody is interested here in using
octane for blender or works in the
virtual production space specifically
within car processing please do come and
speak to me afterwards either here or in
the bar later on I would love to have a
chat with you about
it uh I would also just like to give a
quick shout out to the rendom network
foundation and otoy um without these
guys the work that we do at Sim plates
would not be possible uh they've pretty
much pushed our pipeline forward about
12 months uh because of the amazing work
they do I believe they've got a booth in
the marketplace on Friday uh so if you
get the chance please do go and check
them out I think they're they're really
great um in addition to this I'm also a
freelance 3D artist I've been using
blender for almost 20 years I'd like to
think I've come you know some way uh
since making some very terrible uh weird
sci-fi thing there on the left um in
addition to doing things like um sci-fi
models in my free time I also work with
I do architectural visualization
projects for housing developers and more
recently I've been working with
musicians uh most notably and recently
Sabrina Carpenter uh I can't talk about
that work unfortunately because it's
under NDA um um but also uh Jacob ker
which brings me to the subject of
today's talk um quick show of hands
actually how many people are aware of
Jacob klier and and know who he is or
fans okay cool a few of you um for those
of you that aren't aware of him he's a
British multi-grammy award-winning
musician um his style is very avantgard
should we say it's a bit kind of crazy
and his latest album uh Jesse Volume 4
or was released back in March um you can
see the album art there on the left the
cool thing about the album art is that
it's actually a photo of a real uh piece
of art uh made by uh the New York artist
Dustin Yellen he's got a very unique
style where he takes thousands and
thousands of images um and layers them
on like planes of glass either by
painting them or printing them um to
create these kind of crazy collages see
here's another example of Dustin's work
um it was a really it was a real trip to
be able to work with them um what they
wanted from us for the Jacob Kia project
was in addition to the um like the music
videos that were being released with the
album they wanted us to digitize that
artwork and then to create kind of audio
re
active um videos so what I ended up
having to do was manually with the knife
tool cutting out over 3,000 images that
was a long two weeks of My Life um there
was a lot of podcasts to listen to
during that and yeah just compiling all
of these things um I've got a little bit
of a demo here of like a medle of stuff
from the album uh that I can play for
you to show you the kind of work that we
did just hoping that the audio levels
are going to be
[Music]
okay to covery
I just want your body
baby and every
night I feel so
tired but I can't
sleep I just might be so now feel free
tell me what's next it go right if I
turn left if I'm really taking flight
can we c a little Jack so much I want to
see it's so much I'm going to get got to
keep my stride with the p up step I'mma
be just fine you can make that bet
everything's on time cuz it's all
concept live a Carefree
life so yeah there's a little selection
there of work thank
you the uh the full videos are available
on Jacob's uh YouTube channel um and so
what I'd like to do today is to create
an audio visualizer completely from
scratch uh utilizing a number of the
concepts that I've demonstrated there
I've actually got there we go I've got
this video um that that I put together
as a demonstration ahead of of this
conference uh the music for this was put
together and arranged and mixed and
recorded by a very good friend of mine
Greg Roberts who specifically recorded
this audio specifically for blender
conference um so I'm just going to play
this and this is what we're going to be
creating live in a
moment if it will play
oh
[Music]
so that's what we're going to start
creating L thank
you well hopefully by the end of this
you'll all know how to make that and you
can give yourselves a round of applause
so I'm going to jump over to blender
I've got a brand new scene I'm uh using
4.2 and I'm actually not going to delete
the default Cube I'm just going to
delete the light though um I'm go into
front view uh Control Alt
zero ah of course it's not doing that
hang on well you ski steps
yeah the HDMI seems to be
not there we
go okay starting fall okay so new file
there we go I'm not going to delete the
default Cube I am going to delete the
light though um I'm just going to
control alt zero to create my camera
view uh in front view and the default
cube is what we're going to use as the
the canvas for creating our uh
visualizer you could use whatever shape
you wanted you could use a sphere you
could use a suzan head do it whatever
you wanted um I'm going to go into edit
mode though and scale this up twice on
the x- axis just to give me a bit more
uh room to work with let's go over to
Geometry nodes uh add a new geometry
node setup and this is where we're going
to start building things out let's turn
off my rels and widgets and
withar so what we're going to do is
start by turning this mesh into a volume
so we're going go mesh to
volume and then we're going to
distribute some points inside that
volume we're not going to work with
instances here I'm just going to render
these directly as points um but of
course you could you know do an instance
on points node later on and put
instances onto them which is how we did
things like the Jacob colia work um I'm
not going to leave this as random I'm
actually going to go with a grid layout
I think it's just going to look a little
better and for our spacing this is where
we can start creating the density of our
uh visualizer so what I'm actually going
to do is use a switch so that I can
basically have like a preview and a
render density and if I use the is
viewport node
I've basically now got a switch where
the true value is going to be my um
density in my viewport and the false is
going to be the density in render so I'm
going to go with 01 and 05 for the
render for the moment we could
parameterize these we might need to
change them later
um I'm also going to do the same thing
for the point radius so I can duplicate
these
hook this up to our radius and I'm going
to go with a viewport density of
02 and a false so render value of
01 so now we've got our points started
I'm going to contrl J add these into a
frame and we'll call it points just
going to try and keep things nice and
organized um whenever I'm creating
geometry node
networks I get a little bit um kind of
OCD about my geometry nodes layouts and
like having things nice and organized
and framed
up so the way that we're going to um
start building this out is by building
layers of noise that we will then
animate uh with our audio values so I'm
going to start by just building those
layers of noise up and then we'll bring
in our audio afterwards so to start I'm
going to use a set position
node going to add a noise
texture and whenever we're using a noise
texture to change the position of points
we always need to
subtract
0.5 from the vector uh this will Center
our Vector around the zero point means
that they don't get offset wonky we're
going to plug this into our offset and
immediately law looks a little bit crazy
we're going to set this to 4D so that we
have a w value to change our noise scale
needs to be way smaller and I'm actually
going to change this I think from fbm to
we'll go ridge multifactor to start
with re offset
this and we're going to need to make the
scale a lot
smaller so 01 and then we can increase
the
Distortion uh quite a lot to say
100 so now let's go with hybrid
multiactor instead there we go that
looks a bit better so now we've got a w
Factor where we could as we move this up
and noise is going to distort and that's
going to be the first layer of
Noise We can frame these up and this is
going to be our noise for our main riff
uh like the main guitar riff of of the
uh
music going to do another one so set
position going to add another noise
texture and instead of just uh
subtracting it so we will do
that but what I'm also going to do is
multiply this by the
position of our points so this is just
going to give us a little bit of an
added level of
complexity so can multiply these
together
and then if we use this as a scale value
we may need to change the scale on this
hook this up to the offset and this one
will go with a hetro
Terrain again this the scale is going to
need to be a lot smaller
01 going to zero these off and increase
our
Distortion set it to 4D so again we've
got a
W value that we can change
here so now we've got two separate W
values that we can
change and in fact I probably need to
scale that a bit further
down lower the strength on it to
0.5 we frame these ones up these are
going to be the noise for our lead
guitar so this is going to be our the
the main kind of solo parts that we
heard during the um during the demo
and then finally we want a third layer
of noise which is going to be our drum
beat and this is going to form that kind
of pulsing motion where every time that
the drum beat hits it pulses outwards so
once again we are going to set
position going to add a noise texture
and in fact
actually what I'm going to do is just
duplicate this whole setup from the
noise lead
and we can rename this to noise
drum hook these up and now this scale
value here let's change this one to
let's change this again so we had a
hybrid multifactor a hetro Terrain and
we'll go with a riged multifactor for
this
one so now as we scale this in the
negative direction we're kind of pulsing
in this outwards and again we've got a
seed value that we can change
here set these back to zero so that when
we add our drums in it's going to push
the scale in the negative
Direction excuse me
um before we start adding our audio
let's set up some materials and the
colors for our visualizer so I'm going
to add a set materal seral
mode I'll split my
window and get a Shader
editor add a new material and I'm just
going to call
it
emission can get rid of our principal
bsdf because we don't need it we're just
going to use an emission
Shader hook that up and instead of
controlling the color and the strength
inside our shaders I want to use
attributes from geometry nodes that I
can then deal with the color and the
strength procedurally inside the
geometry nodes Network so let's just
turn the strength on our world down to
zero you can come into
EV make sure we're using our seene
world we can set the material in our
geometry
nodes um I'm also actually before I set
up those attributes I'm going to just go
to the compositor use nodes and I'm
going to add a glare node just so we're
going to get a little bit of Bloom set
these to
0.75 and with a size of I five
maybe make sure we enable our compositor
in our viewport shading five is way too
strong yeah four that'll
do let's go back to our Shader and as I
said instead of control ing the color
and the strength from our Shader editor
we're going to use attributes inside our
geometry nodes so all we're going to do
is add an attribute node we'll call this
first one
color and we can duplicate it and we'll
call this one
strength hook these up and of course
everything goes black because these do
not currently exist as attributes that's
okay we can now create
those so stor end attribute let's get
two of them first one is going to be
called color and it's going to be a
color on the point
domain and then the next one will be
strength which turns out I can't spell
there we
go so now we can control our color and
our strength directly inside of geometry
nodes for our color um I want these to
have that kind of um kind of rainbow
effect where it's going through all the
colors of the color spectrum so I'm
going to use a color
ramp and the way that I'm going to set
this up is by using the
noise Factor right at the beginning from
our riff so if I store an attribute
here we'll call this
noise and we'll hook up the factor to
here we can then use this attribute
later on for our materials so we're
going to get a named
attribute get our
Noise by hooking this into the color
ramp and then the color into the color
we now have colors that are going to
work depending on our
noise so as I change the W value of our
noise those color are going to follow
along with
it don't just want to set it as these
kind of blue and greens though I want a
kind of a rainbow effect and there's a
really easy way to do that with the
color ramp um if you just change it the
color mode to HSV and change it to far
and what we can do is that will
literally call go around the entire
color wheel so I can set the first flag
to a hue of zero and a saturation and
value of one and the second second flag
to a human saturation of
one and now we're going to have a color
ramp that is going across the entire
color
spectrum for our strength as we saw in
the demo video we wanted different
colors to have different strengths and
for those to be able to change
dynamically based on our
audio well we've already got our noise
attributes so what I can do is say that
when noise is equal to a certain value
we can use that as a
switch to change the strength of our
emission so if I plug these into my
switch we'll say that true we'll say two
and a false of 0.1 we may need to change
these later as we start playing these uh
live for audios and now our Epsilon
becomes the range of our color r that
we're going to see so as I scroll this
up you know we're going to see a lot
more of it so if I set it to
0.1 we're getting that kind of just that
yellow and red area at the back as I
scroll this up we're now going to be
able to change the illuminated color of
our visualizer and this is a value that
we will plug in to our audio buffer
shortly to be able to uh control that
based on the drum beat
let's frame these
up and we'll call these
materials so now we've got our buffer
well we've got our visualizer set up we
actually now need to start bringing in
our audio and dealing with the audio
reactivity part so the first thing that
I need to do is to bring my audio
actually into blender so I'm going to
change this to the video
sequencer shift a and add
sound and if I go to my audio tracks
folder this is the folder that was
downloadable um earlier and in it you'll
see we have four different um audio
files uh we have the drums the lead
guitar and the Riff that are all
separated from each other and then we
have the mix master which is the main
Master track of our audio so this is the
audio that we can load in to our video
sequencer
so we'll add the sound strip and it's
obviously far too big for our timeline
so let's check under our time Source
here we can see that it's ending at 881
so let's change our
frames and let's I'm just going to lower
this volume cuz I don't know how loud
this is going to be far too loud my
apologies
0.1 but that's still too
loud there we
go so so we've now got our audio loaded
into our video sequencer um the next
thing that's really important anytime
that you are dealing with audio in
blender is to change your playback from
play every frame to sync to audio uh
because otherwise what you're going to
see in the viewport is not going to be
the same or it's not going to be the
same as when you render because it's
going to try and play every single frame
so you need to make sure that you set
this to sync to
audio next we want to start bringing in
those other three audio files that we
can deal with for our seed
values so going to go to My Graph
editor and going to add a value
node we'll rename this node as riff
making sure that my playhead is at uh
the first frame I'm just going to press
press I to key frame this and I can then
bring this uh I can use our audio files
to control this value if we go Channel
sounds to
samples and I need to find my audio
tracks and we've got a bunch of options
here um you've got like a frequency
range which basically gives you a well
exactly a range of frequencies that will
isolate the different uh parts of the
audio um so for instance if you just
wanted the the base of um an audio you
could set this between 250 and 2,000 if
you wanted The Trebles you could do 6 to
8,000 uh Etc I'm sure if you just Google
you know the different frequency ranges
for different parts you can find uh that
information quite easily online uh in
this case we're just going to leave
these as the defaults uh for the moment
although we will change these later on
for the drums we're going to select our
riff SS to samples and we now have a
kind of an F curve inside of our graph
editor that is representative of the
volume basically of our audio file we
could if we wanted to uh go samples to
keys and actually turn these into actual
key Frame data that we could manipulate
in other ways we could change them move
them around add modifiers to them I'm
going to undo that I'm just going to
leave them as the default samples for
the moment and you can see as I start
scrolling through my timeline that riff
value here is now
changing however I don't um just want to
plug this directly into the W value
because otherwise it's just going to
kind of oscillate back and forth like
this and give this kind of weird like
jaggedy jumping motion which is not what
I want I want these to accumulate over
time um before anybody might uh ask at
some point later on the sounds to
samples there is an accumulate option
here um however I found that this
produces kind of a bit more um like
jaggedy results it doesn't necessarily
uh like Smooth that curve out and so
what I'm going to do instead is actually
build my own
accumulated um node for my sound but
buffer using simulation nodes so that's
where our audio buffer is going to come
in so off of our riff we're going to add
a reot node contrl G to put it into its
own node
group get rid of that and let's rename
our inputs our first input is going to
be
our audio and our output for the first
one is going to be
accumulated let's add a simulation
Zone and for anybody who's unsure or
unaware of exactly what simulation zones
do um they basically allow you to track
data over time that's the simplest
explanation of it um and obviously you
can use that to create very complex
physics simulations or you know crazy
kind of traffic
simulations um all we're going to be
doing is using it to track our audio
data uh we're just creating a data
buffer
basically to do this we're going to need
something to store our data on so I'm
going to add a
points and I'm just going to add a
single point um I'm not using this point
to like instance or render in any way
I'm just using it as a container for our
data um I'm also going to need to split
my window here and get the spreadsheets
as
well make a b more room
here to get the audio to get the
information out of our points out of our
data container and then into something
that we can use in our main setup um
what we're going to do is just sample
the
index we can leave the index at zero
because there's only one point so it's
an index of zero anyway and what we're
going to sample is a named
attribute we're going to call this
accumulated and then hook it up to our
output obviously we don't have an
accumulated attribute yet so we need to
store one so store named
attribute apologies if I'm going a bit
too fast for everybody by the way that's
following along I'm just trying to make
sure that we get through it on time um
I'm going to copy and paste the name
into my
attribute and and all I need to do is to
take my audio and
add the accumulated attribute to it on
every frame so that on the first
frame we we don't have
anything um that's like the accumulated
attribute is at zero because it doesn't
exist so it's just going to store the
audio on the second frame it's going to
store it's going to update with the
audio from the previous frame and the
audio from the second frame and so on
and so forth so now we have an
accumulated uh output and I'm going to
run this through a multiply node so that
we've got like a Scala value uh so we
can control the strength and I'm going
to set this to say 0.2 and now if I plug
this into my w for my audio as I play
this
[Music]
through the noise is going to change
over time and as you may have noticed at
the start when that riff slowed down and
there was a noticeable break in the
audio the visualizer stops
moving there uh because there's no more
frames that are being there's no more
data that's being added to our
accumulated attribute on those frames
because the audio is
dropped next we can do exactly the same
thing for our lead guitar so let's
duplicate all of these
nodes we'll rename our Riff to be
lead set this back to zero and making
sure that I'm on the first frame I to
key frame and we're going to do exactly
the same thing channels sounds to
samples and we'll bring our lead guitar
um we again we can leave the all the
settings as default for the moment
that's not a
problem and now we have an audio wave
here that there's nothing at the start
because the lead guitar doesn't kick in
on this until later on around that 250
frame hug this into our
W and again let's what I'm actually
going to do is disconnect it the W here
on our riff just so we can see what the
lead guitar is
[Music]
doing so our lead guitar is
now controlling the
noise of
this so now we have our lead guitar set
up next we want our
drums so again we can do duplicate all
of these
nodes rename this to
drum I to add key frame channels need to
make sure that the uh node is actually
selected sounds to samples we'll select
our drums and on this one I actually do
want to change the frequency range
because what I would like is the the
pulsing motion that we want to add on
every drum beat I want that to be
stronger for the symbols so when the
symbols are hitting it's
pulsing uh in a bigger way than just the
kick drum so I'm going to change that
from 0 to 100,000 to I think 5,000 to
10,000 and these are in
kilohertz sound samples and you can see
we've got
our audio here it's obviously very um
like the size of the values is quite
small because we've isolated those frame
ranges um if I was to redo that and just
set those back to the
defaults
so0 to whatever the default was or
100,000 the audio for the drums now on
the default values is obviously a lot
stronger but that's not what we want on
this specific occasion so set that back
to 5,000
10,000 and you'll see now that we've got
these different spikes for our Kick Drum
and then as we look over here these are
going to be our symbol crashes so our
symbols are going to be a lot stronger
than our Kick Drum which is exactly what
we want I'm going to need to multiply
this up quite a lot uh potentially by
10 plug this into the W and for remember
we said that we need to change the
negative of our scale here so I actually
don't need to use my audio buffer for
that can just take another multiply node
hook the drums straight into it and we
can do it by negative 10 because we need
to make sure we're going in the negative
Direction hook this up to the scale of
our noise
drum so now as we again if I
disconnect the
um the guitars so we're not going to see
any of the Distortion we're just looking
at what the drum is
doing so that's becoming a lot stronger
compared to uh just the where it's
pulsing on the kick
drum so now if we hook all these back up
together add these back into the W go to
the start and we can see what this looks
like in
[Music]
total so yeah it's looking pretty
decent oh thank
[Applause]
you so next we want to there's going to
be a bit of kind of data wrangling in
this next bit um so if I lose anybody
with some of the math if I haven't lost
half of you already um I apologize and
please feel free to to ask later on uh
any questions that you might have uh so
what we now want is that uh n That B
value where we're equal to our noise
where we're choosing the selection of
our color I want that to be dependent on
the drum beat so I'm going to get I'm
going to reduplicate that and this one I
am going to use just the default drum
values so we can key frame it Channel s
samples take our drums we'll reset these
to our
defaults so we've got these big spikes
which is every drum and symbol beat and
what I would like is that after every
drum beat we randomize the color that is
selected
so how do we do that we're going to use
our node Group which I should really
name we'll call
this audio buffer let's duplicate our
audio
buffer We'll add our drum beat into this
and we're going to use uh this
simulation Zone to be able to track when
our data is at a certain value
in My Graph I'm going to untick uh the
only show selected so I can see all of
my audio files here um and also the one
thing that actually just as a small
gripe uh while I've got a platform for
it I'm it really annoys me that you
can't rename these default like the
names of like the default value in the
graph editor if anybody knows how to do
that or if there's any devs watching
that know would would like to try and
fix that please that would be great um
I'm going to turn those off though for
these ones so we just want to isolate
our drum Meats I'm also going to just
add a rot node here and view oh in fact
I won't do that just yet what I want to
do is to control that b value from
inside of my audio buffer so just like
we did with the accumulated out output
I'm going to sample another one
duplicate the wrong things there named
attribute and Sample index and I'm going
to call
this
selection we'll hook this one up to our
outputs and we'll rename
it and we can hook our
selection up to that b
value so obviously we don't yet have a
selection attribute so let's create one
store end
attribute call it selection so now as I
change this value we're
changing the color selection and I'm
going to use random value just between
zero and one we can hook this up and now
we have a
seed that as we change our seed value
we're changing the different color
selection
just like we've already been doing with
named attributes we're going to use
another one and we're going to call this
seed and we'll hook this up to our seed
and I think this needs to be an
integer and again we can now store the
named
attribute make this an
integer seed so now when we change this
seed
here our colors are
changing so how can we change our seed
value based on our audio well what I'm
going to do is again we're going to need
two more
attributes going to call this one
um f for frame that's fine and it's
going to be a Boolean value so what we
can say is that with our
audio when our audio is equal to a
certain value
it's either going to be true or false
and that value and the Epsilon is going
to be a value based on our wave on our
audio here so I'm thinking when it gets
to like this zero when it hits the
bottom of these spikes that's when I
want my seed to change we also need to
make sure that we add a bit of a Epsilon
because it doesn't quite reach zero on
the symbol values where the this is
where the symbols are hitting and it's
not quite reaching zero so if we say
zero with an Epsilon of
0.1 and hook this up to our value and
now what I'm going to do is just view
our point so just need to keep an eye on
the uh the spreadsheet you're not going
to see anything in the uh the viewport
for the moment but now so our F
attribute is true because the value is
at zero and as I scroll
up
with true false
true false true Etc so we've now got a
Boolean
value that we can use as a switch there
is one problem though this value this
Boolean value of f is currently true
for 1 2 3 4 four five six like six
frames if we were to use that to change
the seed it's going to mean that the
color is going to change six times in
six frames and I don't want to give
anybody an epileptic fit so instead what
we can
do is we're going to add one last
attribute again it's going to be a
Boolean value and it's going to be F
minus
one and the value
is just going to be F so every
time delete
that select the correct one there we go
so now when I go back to the start f is
true and F minus one is false on the
second
frame f is false but F minus one is now
true because this is now the value of
what F was on the previous frame so by
doing this we're able to now track
when our dat when our value changes the
first time so we can say that when f is
true so as we go up they're both false
now but now we've just hit that point
where we want our color to change f is
true and F minus one is false so we can
just do a little bit of Boolean math
take both of our
attributes so when f
is equal to one or
true and F minus one is equal to zero so
it's
false we're going to add a bullan math
node and say that when both of these are
true this is now giving me a
switch change it to an integer this is
now a switch that I can use to add to my
seed so when that's false it's going to
be zero when it's true it's going to be
one so we're going to add one to our
seed make a little bit more
room we can add
these to our seed attribute just like we
did with the
accumulated and add this together so now
as I go back to the start we have a seed
of one and a selection of
0.295 as I go
up our seed has now changed as as our
selection value
when we hit the next one our seed
changes
again keep going so on and so forth so
now if I get rid of my viewer node this
should in
[Music]
theory means that our color is also
changing
that's pretty much it I mean the the
thing here is this is a relatively
simple example um to be honest it's only
a couple of different noise textures um
you know you could make these as complex
as you wanted you could add more noise
textures you could do lots of different
things with it um I've got a couple of
different examples here of I don't say
accident to be fine demo plane is this
one so I've got another example oo that
was way too
loud so I've got a similar thing here
where instead of it being on a um just
Distributing a load of points instead
it's on like a kind of a grid that's
Distributing up and
down and it's exactly the same concept
and it's a lot of these things that we
use for the Jacob colia project where we
used we separated that head into
different colored
collections um and we were able to use
the exact same uh kind of techniques to
be able to to do the Jacob colia stuff
um just looking at the time looks like
I'm doing pretty good uh so yeah that's
it for me if anybody has any questions
feel free to ask thank you
[Applause]
uh does anybody have any questions Y is
it possible to do it with audio pardon
sorry is it possible to do it with light
AIO as
um I'm answer that is I'm not sure to be
perfectly honest I'm sure it probably is
but you need to get some way of bringing
the audio directly in to blender I'm not
I'm not sure how you do that um but I
mean all of this is based on kind of a
key on key frames basically uh on a
value that's being tracked from uh like
a soundwave so if you're able to get
that into blender then yes but I don't
know how to do that need to be sampled
as well yeah exactly it would need to be
sampled live yeah any other
questions no great thank you
[Applause]